Hemant K.
But instead, DealShare has scaled back and the promise of social commerce is all but dead. Besides offering a digital B2B wholesale platform for kirana stores and retailers, DealShare operates an online grocery store for consumers as well. Its earlier social commerce play has more or less been retired now with a focus on B2C and B2B2C ecommerce.
In July, the company claimed to have over 1 Cr customers, with 1.5 lakh daily orders fulfilled. In its private label business, DealShare said it has eight brands across 16 categories, besides connecting 500 other brands to 1,000+ retailers in India.
It's perhaps fortunate that DealShare managed to secure a funding round at the time it did. Since March 2022, valuations have become fickle and VCs are not shy about calling out the need for correction. Revenue projections, which were once rather ambitions, have also sobered down.
Even before it turned a unicorn, DealShare has been ultra-bullish about its revenue projections. In July 2021 (FY22), after the startup raised $144 Mn, cofounder Medda said DealShare was on track to hit "$1 Bn gross merchandise value run rate by the end of the year and is very close to breaking even."
As we now know, DealShare saw losses grow by nearly 7X in FY22 to INR 431 Cr, far from breaking even. The company primarily earned revenue from sale of goods, as a result its expenses leaned heavily towards purchase of stock in trade. It purchased stock worth INR 2,088 Cr in FY22 and earned INR 1,925 Cr in the year from sale of products.
Losses are not alien to the ecommerce sector, of course. While no one expects an ecommerce company to become profitable in its first few years — even Flipkart is in the red and Meesho's FY22 loss stood at a staggering $500 Mn — there needs to be some justification for the fundraise, which usually depends on scale and revenue rate.
Let's understand whether DealShare has the scale and engagement to justify the valuation and show that it can potentially accrue enough revenue from this scale to break even.
As we can see in the below charts, DealShare's engagement (monthly and daily active users) and downloads have declined drastically, according to data sourced through Apptopia.
Unsurprisingly, downloads peaked to around 2 Mn per month just before DealShare's unicorn round in January 2022 when it raised $165 Mn and since then monthly downloads have not cracked the 500K mark in the past 15 months.
Even though these numbers pertain to the Android app only, DealShare recently claimed that 99% of its volume comes from this channel.
The daily active user count has not been higher than 420K per month for the past three months. It's not clear how the company plans to drive engagement and the downloads without raising fresh funds to fuel marketing and promotions.
Users are also fed up with DealShare's tech and delivery issues.
Multiple social media posts, such as this one, point to the company automatically cancelling orders, delivering tampered packages and not refunding the amount for cancelled orders to customers.
Many customers told Inc42 that the company cancels orders without notice and does not refund the money to the source of payments. Instead, the amount is deposited to a DealShare Wallet, which has a one-year expiry period for fund deposits.
Given that orders are automatically cancelled at times, users find it complicated to utilise their wallet balance as highlighted by tweets as late as July 2023 . Besides this, the platform is inundated with complaints about delays in deliveries for products such as flour, rice and other staples.
The primary problem for DealShare today are the executional issues in its distribution and warehousing operations. The layoffs earlier this year have further dented the operations in certain regions.
B2B wholesale distribution is a complicated beast due to the competition and the aggressive margin play involved.
Warehousing and distribution are said to be the biggest success factors in online B2B wholesale commerce, and challenges in this regard can hamper margins in the long run. This is the area that the likes of JioMart, Udaan, Jumbotail, Shopkirana and others have looked to grow in the past few years.
Even at the best of times, the margins are low because distributing to stores is fraught with logistics challenges. Startups compete by building warehouses and customising their supply chain for manufacturers and kiranas, and offer perks such as upfront payments to manufacturers to get longer contracts.
Competing in this segment requires not just extensive experience to build distribution networks but also financial flexibility to discount certain orders. Companies have struggled with razor thin margins due to the high competition from traditional B2B wholesalers.
Udaan was founded in 2016, two years before DealShare, but its losses in FY22 surged 1.2X to INR 3,075.80 Cr compared to INR 2,503.30 Cr in the previous year. This was on a revenue base of INR 9,880 Cr. In the year, Udaan spent INR 9,415 Cr in purchase of stock. Even at that scale, breakeven remains elusive. DealShare has a long way to go before catching up.
In early August, a report by The Arc claimed that despite having cash reserves of $150 Mn, the management is not allowed to access this cash for day-to-day affairs. The publication claimed DealShare management requires investor approval to access these reserves.
The company also said it would be focussing heavily on a hybrid approach with branded offline stores backing up the B2C and B2B2C ecommerce operations.
The pandemic more or less forced retailers and kiranas to use digital platforms to order directly from manufacturers. It not only widened the opportunity for Udaan, Peel-works' Taikee, Shopkirana and others but also compelled giants such as Jio and Tata (armed with BigBasket) to enter the fray.
New-age companies such as Udaan, JioMart and DealShare offer a convenient way for retailers to buy products at wholesale prices, but DealShare is not in the position to dictate pricing to manufacturers just yet.
Even Udaan struggled with this issue and took FMCG giant Parle to the Competition Commission of India. Udaan had alleged that Parle was deliberately blocking supply of certain products to the startup, which forced the company to buy from the open market and thereby compromise on the margins.
Such scenarios are not uncommon in the B2B space. Besides Parle, even Amul stopped supplying products to Udaan.
Reliance Retail's JioMart seems to have made a huge leap by adding Metro Cash & Carry to its bucket. JioMart's entry has already made life difficult for the likes of Udaan, and DealShare will have to contend with this major headwind as well.
Even Flipkart has jumped in with both feet and is banking on a healthy mix of product categories to get higher margins on average. But in the B2B segment too, Flipkart has considerable losses .
However, it must be noted that DealShare has the backing from Unilever Ventures, which is the venture capital and private equity arm of global FMCG giant Unilever. It's not clear how much of DealShare's business comes from Unilever and Hindustan Unilever-owned brands. The latter operates over 65 brands in India across categories.
Given that the competition DealShare is perhaps stepping into this space a little too late and on the backfoot. Its extended focus on loss-making social commerce and B2C business may prove to be a dead-weight for the startup.
Revenue has to outpace costs of purchase of stock, as highlighted by Udaan's financials and to get there, DealShare has to get the right margins from its network consistently over many quarters.
While DealShare says it would be setting up retail stores to back ecommerce operations, this hybrid play will also require significant investments, and it's not likely to deliver profits in the short term.
If it is looking to scale up and expand its geographical reach, DealShare has to seek sustainability by charging higher margins than players such as JioMart or Udaan. This may make the company less appealing to manufacturers as a whole, especially if DealShare is not able to sign up more retailers to buy this stock at wholesale.
This is where the challenge lies for DealShare. Even at its optimistic best, the company cannot deny that B2B ecommerce and scaling up the retail play will have several unit economics challenges. The exit of the cofounder and CEO at this juncture makes this journey that much harder.
Note: We at Inc42 take our ethics very seriously. More information about it can be found here.
