Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.
By clicking "Sign Up," you also agree to marketing emails from both Insider and Morning Brew; and you accept Insider's Terms and Privacy Policy . Click here for Morning Brew's privacy policy.
A group of former Twitter employees filed a lawsuit on Tuesday accusing the platform's owner, Elon Musk, of sex, race, and age discrimination. 
The seven plaintiffs all worked for Twitter, now known as X, until November 2022, when the company initiated  major layoffs  following Musk's acquisition earlier in the year. The lawsuit, which was obtained by Insider, was first reported by  Rolling Stone .
The lawsuit alleges some employees were laid off after either taking or preparing to take family or medical leave. It also alleges that the layoffs disproportionately impacted women, Black employees, and employees aged 50 and older.
"The fact that more women than men were laid off is not surprising given Musk's history of making sexist, demeaning, and hostile comments against women," the lawsuit said, going on  to   cite   examples   of  "discriminatory and demeaning comments" made by Musk.
The lawsuit notes that within weeks of the layoffs,  Musk tweeted on December 4 , "Testosterone rocks, ngl," using the abbreviation for "not gonna lie." Musk was responding to  another tweet  referencing  director James Cameron's view  that testosterone is a "toxin that you have to slowly work out of your system." 
This is not the first time Musk and X have been hit with similar accusations.
In December 2022,  two women who lost their jobs  at Twitter  filed a lawsuit  claiming that the company's layoffs "impacted female employees to a much greater extent than male employees." The suit was  dismissed in May  by US District Judge Jon Tigar, who  said  the plaintiffs should have resolved the complaint through federal agencies first. 
In March, Musk also had to  apologize to a former Twitter employee  after  baselessly accusing him of using his disability  as an "excuse" to do "no actual work."
And in April, Musk's electric vehicle company Tesla was ordered to pay  $3.2 million in damages to a Black employee. The employee accused Tesla in 2017 of failing to prevent the racist abuse he faced while working at the company's Fremont plant.
Representatives for X did not immediately respond to a request for comment from Insider sent outside regular business hours.
Sign up for notifications from Insider! Stay up to date with what you want to know.
