NCUA's efforts to provide rules of the road notwithstanding, new regulatory directives regarding decentralized finance for the other banking categories are much needed. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has oversight over MDIs, while CDFIs are regulated by FDIC, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Reserve Board.
FDIC, OCC, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System issued guidance two years ago for community banks "entering into business arrangements with fintech companies to offer enhanced products and services to their customers, increase efficiency, and reduce internal costs." Cryptocurrency was not expressly mentioned.
Nicole A. Elam, Esq., CEO of the National Bankers Association, wrote in an editorial last fall that the digital transformation process for most minority-owned banks "is expensive, and with MDIs already lacking sufficient capital, digitizing proves to be an additional challenge. That's why MDI and fintech (financial technology) partnerships are essential for survival."
Partnership agreements with decentralized entities are on the rise, but these institutions must tread lightly.
The National Bankers Association Foundation published a report for MDIs last April, which outlines challenges it says are "compounded by the lack of clarity from regulators regarding who bears responsibility for given failures and what "reasonable" due diligence looks like in terms of a paper trail when issues arise." The report continues, "Consequently, banks that pursue digitalization are rendered more vulnerable to enforcement actions or other measures when issues arise since it makes it more difficult for banks to show that they conducted themselves in a blameless manner."
America's largest Black-owned bank, OneUnited , is taking steps to innovate through collaborations, despite the crippling restrictions. Its website notes that it "does not offer cryptocurrency. However, you can use your OneUnited Bank Visa Debit Card to purchase or sell cryptocurrency through a crypto wallet."
, and others that cater to high net worth individuals and accredited investors are entering the digital assets market seemingly with little consequence. The Federal Reserve Board of Governors last October gave the green light to investment bank BNY Mellon to begin holding and transferring digital assets for its clients.
Conversely, the institutions that consumers who have been locked out of financial markets are likely to first turn to are neither equipped nor do they have the technological capabilities to offer digital assets.
This disparity will surely impact consumers. If financial inclusion and mitigating risks are truly federal priorities, small, community-based entities should be among the first to receive expanded regulatory authority, as well as, resources for infrastructure development.
Absolutely, a new regulatory framework for blockchain and cryptocurrency is paramount, but the approach must not be one-size-fits-all. Rather, when it comes to TradFi, provisions should be formulated with credit unions, CDFIs and MDIs in mind. Congress and regulatory agencies need to do the hard work of governing. And that should include customizing measures for the various categories of banking institutions that permeate U.S. financial markets. Most importantly, they must strike a better balance between protection policies and financial inclusion measures that can foster wealth creation.
CEO Elam added , "MDIs have traditionally been engines of economic development during good times and bad. They provide essential financial services to communities that are more likely to be unbanked or underbanked…Yet, access to capital and disparities in the regulatory treatment of MDIs remain obstacles to providing banking services to communities most in need. Those obstacles perpetuate the racial wealth gap in America."
As Members of Congress deliberate GAO's analysis , they should be cognizant that CDFIs, MDIs, and credit unions, like other institutions across the financial services landscape, have a right to regulatory clarity to ensure they can compete in the 21st-century innovation economy, and can safely and responsibly deliver digital assets to new retail investors and customers.
Follow me on  Twitter  or  LinkedIn . Check out my  website . 
