Chad Doellinger has been promoted to general counsel and Banke Odunaike has been promoted to chief culture officer, a new position.
Dallas-based real estate services giant CBRE Group Inc. announced the promotions of two leaders to senior executive positions.
Chad Doellinger has been promoted to general counsel and Banke Odunaike has been promoted to chief culture officer, a new position.
Doellinger and Odunaike have joined the CBRE executive committee, which is composed of CBRE CEO Bob Sulentic and a group of eight senior executives who report directly to him.
"Chad and Banke are rising leaders who enhance our executive leadership team," Sulentic said in a statement. "Chad is an innovative strategic thinker, and we will benefit significantly from his counsel and leadership. Banke is an accomplished executive who brings an important international perspective to her new responsibilities."
Doellinger was a senior member of the CBRE legal group from May 2020 to April, before being promoted to chief transformation officer earlier this year. He previously served as legal chief operations officer and deputy general counsel overseeing litigation, intellectual property and other areas.
His prior experience includes serving as Head of Complex Litigation for Walmart. The company said it has decided to move the general counsel role to Dallas.
Larry Midler, CBRE's current general counsel, decided to step down rather than relocate to Dallas, the company said. He will remain with the company in a consulting capacity through mid-2024.
In her new role, Odunaike will support the effort to advance CBRE's already-strong culture with an initial focus on oversight of four areas: ethics & compliance, diversity across multiple dimensions globally, senior leadership talent identification and development, and succession planning, working in partnership with the CBRE People team on the latter two activities.
Odunaike has been a member of CBRE's legal group since 2017, rising to the top position overseeing all legal matters across EMEA and APAC for the advisory services business segment.
A Fortune 500 company, CBRE Group is the world's largest commercial real estate services and investment firm, based on 2022 revenue. It has roughly 115,000 employees (excluding Turner & Townsend employees) serving clients in more than 100 countries.
Get on the list.
Dallas Innovates, every day.
Sign up to keep your eye on what's new and next in Dallas-Fort Worth, every day.
One quick signup, and you're done. 
