Dubai: Whether you are in the UAE on a tourist, visit or residence visa, it is important to always remember the date on which you visa expires. This is because if you overstay your visa, you would be liable to pay fines as determined by the Federal Authority for Identity, Citizenship, Customs and Port Security (ICP).
Here is how you can find out when your visa expires, and how to check any overstay fines you may have incurred.
When will my visa expire?
1. On your visa copy: When you are issued a visit visa or a tourist visa, you typically receive an electronic copy, either on your registered email address, if you apply for it directly through ICP or the General Directorate of Residency and Foreigners Affairs – Dubai (GDRFA – Dubai) or from the travel agent, if you have applied through an agency.
The last date of the visa's validity is clearly mentioned on this visa copy as 'expiry date', right after the visa number – which is also referred to as the entry permit number - and the date and place of issue.
You will then be asked to provide your passport number, visa number and date of birth. Once you enter the details, the system will show you details of your visa, along with the 'Last Date of leaving the country'.
1. Visa sticker - As a residence visa holder, you can check the date your visa is about to expire by either looking at your residence visa – if you recently renewed your visa, or applied for one, but you may not have a visa stamp on your passport. However, you can still check the digital version of your visa, by following these steps .
2. Emirates ID - Your Emirates ID would also be a good reference point, to check the expiry date, as the visa and Emirates ID application procedures have been unified . On your Emirates ID, look at the date of expiry. This would be the same date that your visa would also expire.
You will then be asked to provide your passport number or Emirates ID number and date of birth. Once you enter the details, the system will show you details of your visa, along with the 'File expiry date'.
You can also avoid getting visa, Emirates ID fines by enabling notifications on your phone. To know more, click here.
The ICP has standardised the overstaying fines in the UAE. According to the new rules, visit, tourist and residence visa overstaying fees have been standardised at Dh50 per day.
Simply enter the details of your visa, after which the system will show you the fines that you need to pay. You can pay the fines by using a credit or debit card.
