If you've used dry shampoo from haircare line Batiste, you may be able to cash in on an incoming multimillion-dollar settlement.
Church & Dwight Co., owner of Batiste, has agreed to pay out $2.5 million in a class action lawsuit  that claims their dry shampoos contain a potentially harmful level of the carcinogen benzene.
The past few years, multiple companies have recalled dry shampoo and other haircare products for containing too much benzene, including The Procter & Gamble Company, which produces Pantene, Aussie, Herbal Essences, Waterless, Old Spice and Hair Food products. Unilever, which produces Dove, Nexxus, Suave, TIGI (Rockaholic and Bed Head), and TRESemmé, issued a similar recall last year.
While Batiste may not be alone in the use of benzene in their dry shampoo products, their agreement to the settlement means customers can follow a few steps for a potential refund.
Who qualifies?
Customers who purchased Batiste Bare or Clean or Batiste Light Bare dry shampoo products before May 30, 2023, may qualify. People who purchased other Batiste products may also be entitled to compensation. Proof of purchase is not necessary but showing a receipt will result in a higher payout.
How do you make a claim?
Consumers who want part in the class action must submit a valid claim form by November 15, 2023. The form asks for information including name and mailing address, information about the products purchased and options to receive payment.
Those who can provide proof of purchase will find a supporting document section to which they can upload their receipt.  
What do you get?
Affected consumers can receive reimbursement through cash payment or a voucher. Those without proof of purchase can receive $2 per product up to five products, for a maximum payment of $10.
People who purchased other Batiste products that were not Bare dry shampoos may still submit a claim to receive a $2 product voucher for each purchased product up to five items, for a maximum total of $10.
Those who purchased Batiste Bare or Clean or Batiste Light Bare dry shampoos and can provide proof of purchase can receive a full refund for each product bought in the designated time frame.
Check your fridge! Organic kiwi recalled in 14 states may be contaminated with deadly listeria.
When do you get it?
The final approval hearing for the settlement is currently scheduled for Oct. 16, 2023, and the final date to submit a claim form is November 15, 2023. While a payout date has yet to be specified, it will likely occur after the 15 of November.
